Title: Camp in Plav – Montenegro with Young, Smart and Enthusiast people – REACT 2013 Montenegro
Date: 2013-12-09 00:00
Author: Predrag TASEVSKI - Pece
Tags: camp, react, nato, conference, montenegro, cyber security, cyberwar, cyber, plav
Slug: camp-in-plav-montenegro-with-young-smart-and-enthusiast-people-react-2013-montenegro

I’m always in big favor when it comes to share, discuss and to spend six
days in camp with young, smart, enthusiast, academical, non-academical,
scholars, military, history critics and politicians in a venue in wild
beauty of Montenegro, near the Plavsko lake in Plav. The location of the
camp was in a such a beautiful area. My eyes could not stop looking for
something, such as either it was the top of the mountain, or the Plavsko
lake, or even the green hills and valleys.

</p>

Anyhow, let me return to the main point here. Firstly I will like to
share a couple of history background of [Regional Euro Atlantic Camp
REACT](http://www.reactmontenegro.me/), organized by [ALFA Center
Montenegro](http://www.alfacentar.org/).

</p>

First REACT camp took place in 2008, since then it takes place every
year, until now six years. The best and intriguing part of this camp is
that each year the venue of the event is in different place, therefore
the participants have a change to meet the beauty of Montenegro. The
idea in behalf of the organizers is very good, and I do support them in
this matter. Sometimes Montenegro routs could be a very heavy for the
drivers, however still this beauty should be exposed to the rest of the
world. Additionally, each year the number of participants varies
depending on the applications. However, this year there where
participants from 25 different countries, which make is in total 75
participants from elsewhere, such as, Balkans countries, Ex-Soviet Union
countries, Hungary, Slovakia, Czech Republic and many others.

</p>

Turning to the
[agenda](http://www.reactmontenegro.me/agenda/agenda.html) of REACT
2013, it was quite densely deployed, with lectures, panel discussions,
etc. Although it was heavy still the best side was the picnic adventures
and cultural evenings. Please feel free to see the pictures below of the
post.

Secondly, I would like to take a time to concentrate more on the issue
of cyber security. During the event the
[speakers](http://www.reactmontenegro.me/agenda/list-of-speakers.html)
where representative of governments from sixteen countries, as well as
NGOs, media, students, researchers, among the others. Mostly, the topics
where concentrating on intention to see the pros and cons of join to
NATO, where indeed the countries from this region have in mind. However,
when it comes to the goals of NATO, and new threats, such as cyber
threats, cyber crime coupled with strategies, framework and so on, only
one speaker it emphasized the importance of cyber security as one of the
greatest risk now a day and in future, of course. I will not delay too
much, as you might all unravel it was the USA Deputy Chief of Mission in
Montenegro, Mr. Jones. Mr. Jones was very precise in his speech,
moreover he mentioned the importance of infrastructure as well as the
stability and security in Balkan region. I would like to cite one of the
lectures, Mr. Petric he said “Together we are stronger!”. How the days
go by, I was just wondering and always trying to ask questions about the
cyber security, and the importance of this issue, however, most of the
speakers where no that specialized or somehow not interested of in fact
important unit of integration requirements in NATO.

</p>

Additionally, I was a moderator to a topic Kosovo open or close? The
question was which topics, fields are close or open, regarding the
Kosovo as a new country in the region.

</p>

In short summary, please feel free to see the pictures below and I hope
that in future to REACT Camp we will have much more discussions and
panels and topics about the new threats that we are facing. Likewise, I
always say, no matter how much we pour money in infrastructure and
security, still the weakest chain will be the human factor, because it
is not a aware of the importance of cyber security. Consequently, we
will have to keep in mind that this issue and importance of cyber
security is in benefits to wide security, economy and political aspects,
by process of joining and integrating the region to the path of NATO.

Pictures
========

<object width="500" height="375"> <param name="flashvars" value="offsite=true&lang=en-us&page_show_url=%2Fphotos%2F29569957%40N00%2Fsets%2F72157648705121698%2Fshow%2F&page_show_back_url=%2Fphotos%2F29569957%40N00%2Fsets%2F72157648705121698%2F&set_id=72157648705121698&jump_to="></param> <param name="movie" value="https://www.flickr.com/apps/slideshow/show.swf?v=1811922554"></param> <param name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><embed type="application/x-shockwave-flash" src="https://www.flickr.com/apps/slideshow/show.swf?v=1811922554" allowFullScreen="true" flashvars="offsite=true&lang=en-us&page_show_url=%2Fphotos%2F29569957%40N00%2Fsets%2F72157648705121698%2Fshow%2F&page_show_back_url=%2Fphotos%2F29569957%40N00%2Fsets%2F72157648705121698%2F&set_id=72157648705121698&jump_to=" width="500" height="375"></embed></object>
